DEEP LEARNING IN BIG DATA
Deep Learning and Big Data are two high-focus areas of data
science. Deep learning algorithms extract complex data
patterns, through a hierarchical learning process by analyzing
and learning massive amounts of unsupervised data (Big
Data). This makes it an extremely valuable tool for Big Data
Analysers.
Big Data has 4 important characteristics, namely, Volume,
Variety, Velocity and Veracity. They are Learning algorithms
are mainly concerned with issues related to Volume and
Variety. Deep Learning algorithms deal with massive amounts
of data, i. e. Volume whereas shallow learning algorithms fail
to understand complex data patterns which are inevitably
present in large data sets. Moreover, Deep Learning deals with
analyzing raw data presented in different formats from
different sources, i. e. Variety in Big Data. This minimizes the
need for input from human experts to retrieve features from all
new data typesfound in Big Data.
Semantic Indexing, Data Tagging and Fast Information
Retrieval are the main objectives of Deep Learning in Big
Data. Consider data that is unstructured and unorganized.
Haphazard storage of massive amounts of data cannot be used
as a source of knowledge because looking through such data
for specific topics of interest and retrieving all relevant and
related information would be a tedious task. Using Semantic
Indexing and Data Tagging, we identify patterns in the
relationships between terms and concepts based on the
principle that words used in the same context have similar
meanings. The related words can then be stored close to each
other in the memory. This helps us present data in a more
comprehensive manner and helps in improving efficiency. A
direct result of such a form of storage would be that search
engines would work more quickly and efficiently.
In the gaming industry, Artificial Intelligence could be useful
as we could have a ‘gamebot’ stand as an opponent when a
human player is not available. We could also have deep
learning algorithms suggest how enemy spawns could be
strategically placed in the arena to obtain different levels of
difficulty. The military as well as aviation industries can use
Artificial intelligence to sort information related to air traffic
and then provide their pilots with the best techniques to avoid
the traffic. A medical clinic can use Artificial Intelligence
systems to organize bed schedules, staff rotations and provide
medical information.
5. CONCLUSION
Deep learning techniques have been criticized because there is
no way of representing causal relationships (such as between
diseases and their symptoms), and the algorithms fail to
acquire abstract ideas like “sibling” or “identical to.” Not
much theory is available for most of the methods which is
disadvantageous to beginners. Deep Learning is only a small
step towards building machines which have human-like
intelligence. Further advancements must be made in order to
achieve our ultimate goal. Organizations like Google,
Facebook, Microsoft and Baidu (a Chinese search engine) are
buying into this technology and exploring various avenues
available. For example, Facebook is using deep learning to
automatically tag uploaded pictures. Google’s Deep Mind
focusses on exploring new techniques in this area. Recent
trends show that the interest in machine learning has only been
growing with time and has sparked an interest in countries like
India and Singapore. Thus it has emerged as one of the most
promising fields of technology in recent times.
6. REFERENCES
4. DEEP LEARNING IN ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE
Artificial Intelligence is the theory and development of
computers which are capable of performing tasks which
humans can. Deep learning represents the rudimentary level of
attempts towards achieving this task. It is utilized in visual
perception, speech recognition, game playing, expert systems,
decision-making, medicine, aviation and translation between
languages.

D. Bouchaffra, F. ykhef in “mathematical model for machine
learning and pattern recognition”.
Itamar Arel, Derek C. Rose and Thomas P Karnowski in” Deep
Learning – A New Frontier in Artificial Intelligence Research”.
Alexander J. Stimpson and Mary L. Cummings in “Accessing
Intervention Timing in Computer-Based Education using
Machine Learning Algorithms”.
Li Deng, Geoffrey Hinton and Brian Kingsbury Microsoft
Research, Redmond, WA, USA in “New Types of Deep
Learning for Speech Recognition and Related Applications: An
overview”.
Maryam M Najafabadi, Flavio Villanustre, Taghi M
Khoshgoftaar, Naeem Seliya Wald and Edin Muharemagic in
“journal of big data”.
Deep learning by Nando de Freitas
An Introduction to Machine Learning Theory And Its
Applications: A Visual Tutorial with Examples by Nick
Mccrea
A Deep Learning Tutorial: From Perceptrons To Deep
Networks
